hi guys so today i'm going to be doing a
video on ivan ilitch
there's a book of his called the
schooling society that i
want to quickly skim over i've already
got to page 12
and in fact i think i read about him
first in this article
uh from supermemoryguru was basically
has pretty good
summary of his life and who he was and
to me it seems clear that
a lot of waz's philosophy regarding
schooling has been influenced by ivan
ilich
um so that was the first time ever heard
of
ivan edge was reading this article and
then he just came up again
around four months ago during the
interview with andy matushak
in the superman mode at wiki discord
channel and
finally he came up again maybe last week
or two weeks ago
um there's this uh
institution called the paris institute
for critical
thinking and they sent me one of their
podcasts
where they mentioned a little bit about
ivan ilitch
and in particular they touched on one of
ivan ellich's
most interesting ideas to me which is
the notion of
a web of peers who collectively seek
knowledge and also his idea of
learning networks as an alternative to
the traditional
um educational institutions and stuff so
um
i'm also creating uh a video
response to the paris institute for
critical thinking's
uh podcast because it was so interesting
and i was so impressed by
the person who was being interviewed in
that podcast every i can't remember her
last name
but she did a very good job uh very
eloquently
um presenting some arguments as to why
uh the traditional education system is
not very good basically i'll leave a
link to that podcast in the description
because it's only 27 minutes long
um but i was just yeah blown away by how
eloquent
how eloquently the arguments were put
forth by every so
um and finally i'm also writing an
article uh
hopefully focusing on this uh learning
networks idea because
um it's really sparked some ideas about
uh the future of
the student member that wiki discord and
um the future of possibly the future of
education as a whole i suppose we'll see
but
anyway that's really the idea that i
want to explore today and i'm going to
start by just
um let's see uh
i think pulled it up yeah i've got the
actual pdf of the book which is quite
short it's only 82 pages so
i've already read up to page 12. um
i think i'll probably just start at the
beginning and make sure i haven't missed
anything out i
want to know i want to be absolutely
sure that when i
make a video on um ivan edge's
book the school in society that i
actually do know what he's talking about
so
that's going to be what i'm going to be
doing in this session just making sure
that i understand everything and that i
haven't left any golden nuggets
uh unmined right so um
that's about it i'm gonna get into it
yep already i mean there's too much to
unpack in this
not even a paragraph just a couple of
sentences and it's already very
interesting
uh it gives me a lot of ideas because um
he's basically saying that
there's nothing you can do with current
institutions uh
you can't introduce new hardware
software
or anything like that in order to
improve the current situation
you need to do basically create the
inverse of an institution and
um he calls this an educational web
to me the inverse of an institution is
more like a decentralized
some sort of decentralized structure so
a web or a network actually is very
a very good way of putting it what's
exceptionally interesting about ivan
ellich is that he wrote this
what at least it's published uh let's
see
i think it was in the 70s 1971 so before
the
internet really took hold
um but he's using terms like
web and network all throughout this book
and that
those are the really the alternatives
that he proposes to
the traditional education settlement
obviously reading this
as a person in living in the year 2021
it's just you can't resist but link this
to the internet
um which has presented so many new
opportunities for
uh delivering education and for finding
other people to
learn with um so i think that's really
what attracted me to
this idea
right yeah so another point um
the paris institute for critical
thinking picked
uh they mentioned that you know rather
than creating an institution
an educational institution what they
were trying to create was an
anti-institution
um and it was an anti-institution in the
sense that it
it didn't have a strong hierarchy it was
like a
much more flat sort of organization
rather than having
layers upon layers of uh you know
underlings
higher ups than the boss right at the
top you know um
yeah so that's just something else to
explore
i'm going to make another point just
before i forget it because it did come
up today
so there had been a talk by a quantum
physicist called paul
in the scene memo dot wiki discord and i
found it really interesting
he talked about the application of space
repetition to
mathematics but he also talked a lot
about
his thoughts about free learning and
how it's more of an optimal choice than
going to school
he did make the point that i found very
interesting
which was that up until the advent of
space repetition free learning was only
like a small improvement
in terms of uh learning speed over
the traditional education system but
with the advent of space repetition
it's now the optimal choice because you
get the pleasure of learning
you're free from coercion plus you have
space repetition so you have the
um extremely efficient uh method of
learning as well
uh some of the stuff like
um about optimization of learning to
evan ellich's argument
because his focus is on you know why
going to school is bad it doesn't focus
on um
why not going to school is can be good
you know if you're
trying to learn optimally so that's one
of the things that i want to add and
though
we haven't really got into the book
we've barely got it past page one
i just want to write it down just so i
don't forget
yeah the uh the creation of
artificial things to replace meaningful
or the true underlying
value or goal that's going to be um a
key thing i want to focus on because i
think it's
a consistent theme running throughout
the entire system
it's the creation of something
artificial to replace something else
so like this
i'm not sure i agree with this
only by channeling dollars away from the
institutions which now treats
he talks about health education and
welfare advice visa
just deal with education only by
channeling dollars away from the
institutions
which now treat education and the
further
impoverishment resulting from their
disabling side effects we stopped
i had some other ideas i don't think
it's anyway
i definitely agree that
with the point that he's making here
just pouring more money in isn't going
to help
i think this is a very good point and it
links to something i've
been thinking about i can't remember
where i heard it
but it's like can you think of
learning as
a preferential attachment process by
which i mean
if you uh let's say you
you're very young you're like two years
old and
you learn um
a little bit more than another
two-year-old or you learn a little bit
faster
just in that very early period
by knowing more things you are then able
to learn at a faster rate
the more you know the faster you learn
so it's like
there's like a matthew effect in um
with wealth like the more money you have
uh the more money you're able to make
is it the same with learning so could
that account for
um the differences like large
differences between adults in terms of
their knowledge
um could it just be down to you know
could you trace it all the way back down
to
um when they were younger you know
simply one having more opportunities to
have uh educational
opportunities casually available to them
such as conversation
and books just those small advantages
at young ages could they uh you know
allow that child to
um build up enough knowledge that they
then start
having this snowball effect where they
are able to
learn more simply because they know more
and that other child who doesn't have
these advantages available to them
they just get left behind
there are loads of instances of this
matthew effect or
i've heard it called preferential
attachment especially um
when it's talked about in like networks
so if you have like a social network
and you have one person who has lots of
friends already
well simply due to the fact that they
have lots of friends they're going to be
able to make
more friends more easily than someone
who doesn't have very many friends
so like new nodes that join the network
are going to
preferentially attach to hubs in the
network
that's sort of what i'm getting at here
and i'm wondering if it's the same
process
another good point there like you can
learn something in many different ways
you don't have to go to school to learn
something but often
uh learning something at school is seen
as giving it sort of a credibility
a stamp of approval that makes that
learning
uh more legitimate than learning in any
other way or
even just by yourself so yeah definitely
agree with this point
yeah the paris institute for critical
thinking also made this
this point that the whole schooling
industry
across the world creates this caste
system
um between nations where you have
countries which are considered to have
very good educational systems
um they're at the top of this
car system and then you have countries
with very which
have educational systems which are
considered to be poor at the bottom
and of course it's the countries at the
top who are deciding
you know they're the ones grading the
nations of the world really
um i'll link that to the
uh podcast
this is of course one of the major
benefits of the internet
right ability for many individuals to
come together to
finance or just lend their time to
creating
sort of free learning opportunities and
resources
i think throughout this book
or at least uh to my memory again i
only read up to page 12 and i'm still
page 10 so um
throughout this book i think elite makes
a lot of
um comparisons between
the education system and state church
so he basically calls school the new
state church
which i think is very interesting
[Music]
and i don't know enough about the state
church to know
how well it applies to i think that's
something i could do some research into
i would uh obviously copy this into my
collection because it's such a good line
but
i know i already have it i actually
already have it as an item so
i don't need it
right so this is his idea of the
constitutional
disestablishment of the monopoly school
um yeah you can't discriminate against
someone based on previous attendance at
some curriculum
rather you have to uh
you have to filter people based on the
skills that they have wherever they've
acquired them i think that's what he's
saying and
i don't know how realistic it is to
expect this sort of
um this sort of thing to get past this
sort of regulation or whatever
um
yeah i have some thoughts on it um
my feeling here was that implementing
this sort of reform
would undermine the legitimacy of the
people actually making the reforms
so that's why i kind of considered it
very unlikely
what's interesting is that there are
some industries in which
people are actually chosen uh
or are hired for jobs based on purely on
their skills regardless of
actually how they acquired these skills
and probably the
[Music]
most obvious example of that is in
the programming industry right people
can
get jobs uh based on having
a little bit portfolio up on github
which people can scroll through and see
what they've done in the past it's just
not
widespread i guess
i'm gonna make a weird point but uh it's
very
it seems related to me to um what the
point i was making earlier
about the matthew effect in learning the
the idea that
um if you have a lot of knowledge it's
easier to acquire more knowledge right
in a certain sense we've created sort of
an artificial matter effect
where in order to be admitted to some
curriculum for example to university
you need to have acquired um already
some credentials at some uh institution
lower in the hierarchy like high school
or whatever right
so in order to acquire more credentials
which have been
substituted for learning real learning
right
uh you have to have already attended a
bunch of other institutions as well so
it's like
i don't know yeah in order to acquire
more credentials you already have to
have credentials and so it just creates
this
ah i don't even know exactly how to
express it but
some strange um
unnatural effect
the logic sent you see this with uh
lectures on youtube right you can have
one superstar lecturer
on youtube who can sort of corner the
market for a certain
uh academic subject right it's sort of
like market-based approach
approach to lecturing you just have one
guy who everyone really likes
and everyone can just um watch their
videos rather than
being forced to uh attend for example a
university and listen to
uh whatever some average lecturer is
saying right
everyone can just sort of converge on
the best one
um i just skimmed that really quickly
but i think he's saying something
interesting and maybe he's not but he's
given me an interesting idea so
uh it looks back to the idea of school
creating this
artificial environment um and then
you sort of exist in this artificial
environment and learn skills
and produce things uh you do homework in
this
artificial environment right when it's
much more
meaningful to do things in the real
world
you need to create things and um
learn things that have utility in the
real world
so there's this example here right the
brazilian teacher
um an adult can begin to read in a
matter of 40 hours if the first words he
deciphers are charged with political
meaning if they have
some sort of meaning to them in reality
that they can actually go and use in
their real lives i think that's a real
important point and
it's a systemic issue in the um
an education system because you exist in
this
fake sort of bubble uh of school
and everything that you create
your homework the tests none of them
actually go into
reality you know they never get put into
the marketplace of ideas they never are
shared into the world with people
facing real world constraints and
like you're sort of cut off from the
rest of
um society and the economic system
and so everything that you create
it isn't uh
you never get good feedback really
basically i think that's that's the
point
you never get good feedback because the
people giving you feedback aren't
actually faced with real world
constraints
and neither are you when you exist in
the school system so
yeah i think that's quite important to
me that's one of the things that
i want to focus on
probably going to have to reword that
because it didn't really make sense but
i hope the
core of the idea uh
makes sense
there we go another excellent point i
remember this from the last time i read
ah descaling um
basically talked about university as a
matchmaker right and you're matching
learning peers essentially and one of
the things that's interesting about
university is that you're not matching
people based on
um like a book you're not matching
people
based on you know uh
when you sign up for university you're
not signing up to
study uh just one single book or a
chapter from a book
you're signing up to study with someone
who's interested in just like
macroeconomics as a whole or economics
as a whole
um what i've read
what i uh sort of interpreted from this
section was that
one thing you could try with would be um
matching people based on a small
unit of mutual interest so
matching people simply based on like um
one paper or one book chapter or
something like that
or just one single single problem
um and this is impossible at a school
uh but it's much more possible on the
internet where you can find
people interested in
very niche things right you can you can
filter people based on a very small unit
of mutual interest like
a single paper or a book um and i think
that's one of the big advantages
of the internet over an institution like
a school or university
yeah the most radical alternative to
school would be a network or service
which gave
each man the same opportunity to share
his current concern with others
motivated by the same concern
so he states it quite generally here
like that could be
your same concern could be you know
reading a book or solving some
small problem or something larger i
suppose
it's quite interesting yeah
like even in the supermemo.wiki discord
you know there are people who
um who come together to study
certain things uh there's the study
group like people
motivated by the same concern they all
want to study at the same time so they
can
remain motivated in their studying you
know the internet makes
uh the creation of sort of ad hoc
um autonomous learning groups like that
very simple
very easy
right yeah here we go
i'm just going to read this part i think
it's really good
let me give this let me give as an
example of what i mean
a description of how an intellectual
match might work in new york city
each man any given moment and at a
minimum price
could identify himself to a computer
with his address and telephone number
indicating the book
article film or recording on which he
seeks a partner for discussion
and then he could receive by mail the
list of others who recently had taken
the same initiative
right
it's real parallels perhaps to be drawn
between like a cryptocurrency and uh
this sort of um decentralization and the
disintermediation of the
university is the matchmaker right um
so i'm just making note of that maybe i
can do some more connections later
he's making a very interesting point
here about the difference between
matching people based on a large
overarching theme for example economics
as opposed to um
a single title like a book the wealth of
nations for example
um and i really want to delve more
deep uh do a deeper dive into this idea
i'm not exactly sure what he's saying
right now so
i will create an extract i'll do it
later
this point that he brings up here um
you know uh not
filtering or not matching people based
on arbitrary
uh things like their background or
whatever um
that's definitely true on the internet i
mean like lots of the people who i've
interacted with
in the supermemo.wiki discord right i
don't know their name i
some of them i don't know their gender
or anything i've literally just
communicated with them
through text but we might have had you
know significant exchanges
you know
this has only become better and better
with the internet right
um he's talking here about what you lose
if
if you match with a person to do some
learning
and you decide that actually this isn't
worth it maybe maybe the cost is too
much
in terms of time or maybe that person
just isn't very interesting or they
don't have very good
takes on whatever you're discussing the
cost to you is very small it's simply
the amount of time you
invested in talking with them but to a
college applicant
you know you might actually be stuck uh
studying that thing you might
have incurred a bunch of fees so you
can't really um
[Music]
drop out or whatever or
on the internet it's extremely
convenient because you know if you join
a discord channel
and you agree to do for example you know
you agree to meet with some people every
week to discuss some paper on some
topic uh if you decide that actually the
value that we're
getting from this isn't worth the cost
you can simply leave that channel you
don't even need to announce to everyone
actually this isn't interesting to me
you can simply click
the red x you know and log off order
it's a good point that um google bundles
a bunch of uh
bunch of services together that don't
need to be collected together
so good point
it's kind of like in software when you
have
like a monolithic program that contains
lots of sub programs right
it's often much more efficient and you
get a better result when you
combine lots of small modular parts
into a larger system right
okay so at this point i'm going to go
through the notes and start organizing
things into
um buckets i guess buckets of themes
that he's talking about and connecting
things together um linking with some
other topics
uh or concepts in my collection and then
i can start uh
organizing my thoughts about what i want
to
write about in this article and talk
about in this video that i want to do
all right so let's get into writing
these notes
uh first what i'm going to do is just
search for levant ilitch
and i'm going to do that because i
suspect that i might have other stuff in
my collection
related to what he was talking about in
the schooling society
yeah very interesting idea here about
twitter as sort of um
a matchmaker between
learning peers i mean twitter it has a
lot of garbage on it
um but it does have potential especially
if you find the right community
to enable interesting discussion
and and it also enables the ability like
to find someone to actually do a serious
sort of
project or serious discussion serious
learning
with yeah like i said i have mixed
thoughts about twitter as a whole
it isn't perfect obviously um
but i can say that i have benefited
even after just a week of using it
because the paris institute for
critical thinking um
they actually sent their podcast to me
which included um
a lot of discussion about some of yvonne
ellich's ideas
uh they sent it to me over twitter just
based on
the fact that i had uh posted
an ilitch quote
so it does have a lot of potential but
it probably isn't the best platform
for matching people specifically
interested in learning
discord of course is another good one i
mean my experience
in the memo.wiki discord channel has
shown me that
it's much easier to find people
interested in quite
niche uh interests
it's very difficult to find other people
interested in
space repetition it's even harder to
find people interested in space
repetition and free learning
but the supernova wiki discord of course
is full of people interested
in exactly those two things and
yeah so it's very clear to me that the
internet is permitting
much more efficient matchmaking compared
to
um institutional alternatives right
so what i'd like to do is create a
perhaps even a concept for this since
it's kind of general
uh the idea of decentralized matchmaking
um i'm just thinking where is the best
place in the tree to create it
often what i do if i don't know where to
put it i'll just put it in this unsorted
concepts folder so i guess that's what
i'll do now
and then i can just move it if i want to
in the future
um
then i will link this to the
decentralized matchmaking idea without
probably without moving it actually no i
will move it
i will move this into the
decentralized matchmaking concept
okay so i was going to go to
uh decentralized matchmaking and i'll
link that to decentralization
which is like a i guess a broader class
of
uh decentralized stuff
one other inefficiency associated with
matching people based on these large
units of mutual interest like
uh large themes just like economics or
something
is that they are bound to curriculum
and course structure and things like
that when you have
people just matching with each other
based on
their interest in just some title or
some paper for example
they're able to dynamically switch and
move around and um
create something that can quickly
conform to
what they the skills they need to
acquire in
like a really rapidly changing
environment so
if there are you know that's one of the
things that people are saying about the
future is that we're going to need to be
able to
rapidly change the skills that we have
and rapidly acquire new skills the only
real way to do that is to
um do so through a
uh not through a school where you're
bound to a curriculum but
you need to be able to dynamically
change actually
what you're learning on the fly
this uh disassociation or sorry
dissociation from
um obligatory attendance kind of links
into the small unit of mutual interest
thing so rather than
signing up to a course you just sign up
for individual sessions
and you can reallocate your time very
easily if you
go to a session and you decide that the
cost is too high or the amount of value
you're getting from that
session is just too low you can
just never go to that thing again but if
you signed up for an obligatory
course or you pay a lot of money for the
course and you want to make sure that
you get your money's worth
those things make it much more difficult
to dynamically reallocate those
resources so
yeah i definitely found that if you want
to optimize learning and creativity you
kind of want to minimize the number of
things
uh in your schedule that are sort of
fixed
and can't be moved so lectures are a
good example if you have
fixed lectures at 9am every morning then
that's just
a period of time that's kind of just
deleted from your day
a time during which you even if you had
some creative idea or you had some
project
you want to work on with something else
that could provide a lot more value than
whatever you do in the lecture it's
simply impossible because the
lecture is obligatory or attendance is
mandated or whatever
so you always this perhaps could become
part of a like a principle like you
always
in order to optimize learning you always
want to strive for independence or
freedom
or you want to minimize unnecessary
obligations
yeah this is another point that relates
to the fake environment thing i was
talking about earlier
um the teachers or professors at
academic institutions they often have
this sort of fake authority that
isn't based on their skill rather it's
simply based on the fact that they are
backed by an institution which itself is
kind of a fake
artificial bubble
and so this one to decentralization
i think i should create a concept for
the artificial environment thing because
i think it keeps coming up
and i won't turn it into a concept yet
actually i'll just move all of the
extracts that
concern an artificial environment to
this folder
so that i can find them easily
this one i think is from somewhere else
in my collection so i'm going to link
this
to evan ilitch
okay so during this final part of the
session i was just grouping all of the
extracts under the major themes from the
book so far
and that will come in handy when i
actually start writing the article and
filming the video that i
plan to make
okay so at this point i've pretty much
grouped all of the major um
[Music]
themes into folders and added all the
extracts under there
and that will help a lot uh when i next
come back to this in the future
but yeah i'm starting to get pretty
tired at this point so that'll be it for
me today
and i'll see you in the next one